# Young Advisors Group Proposals for DG Connect on Education and ICTYoung Advisors Expert Group, May 2013

*Background information: the role of education in getting young people digital was a hot topic at the meeting between Neelie Kroes and the Young Advisors group on [March 4, 2013](http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/minutes-1st-meeting-between-neelie-kroes-and-young-advisors-group-4-march-2013). We were challenged to come up with some proposals on the topic.*

## Change the role of teachers, give them more freedom### Emphasize and modernize ICT at schools for teachersToo many young teachers arrive at schools unprepared for the modern age. ICT is usually just one course at their university, often includes outdated technologies, and they certainly don't learn how to do any meaningful coding or online collaboration. We need to starting thinking about teaching as a digital job, teachers as hackers.
### Empower a horizontal structure in which the teacher gives advise and mentorship, but it's not a dictatorTwo centuries ago teachers may had been the unique ones with information, and thus power, but nowadays information is everywhere and free. If we want to live in a democratic, open, innovative world, the role of teachers must change. From the providers of knowledge to facilitators of learning.### More freedom when it comes to creative teaching methods and the usage of ICT for teachersLess focus on strict curriculum, more on important outcomes we want to achieve. Don't make teachers ask for permission every time they want to use a new tool, don't drown them with rules, deadlines and forms to fill in, do provide them with technical support. Provide more visibility to teachers with creative approaches and successful ICT supported classrooms.### Provide teachers with enough time for experimenting and learning new tools If we expect teachers to be willing to learn new things, they must have the time and space to do so without unnecessary pressure. Emphasize and reward peer-to-peer learning, the exchange of good practices among teachers. Set up more exchange programs among schools, so that successful teachers can demonstrate their methods in different classrooms. Maybe some contests or school rankings could also be helpful. ## ICT education should be in hands of experts, involve parents### Have ICT courses at all levels of education delivered by competent teachers ICT isn't a big part of our schools, so teachers with too little hours take on teaching this very important subject, often without the right competences. ICT courses should help kids understand how technology can improve our lives and give them the opportunity to create interesting projects with code, various online tools and hackable gadgets, not bore them to death with spreadsheets. Schools need proper ICT specialists on board that can help everyone understand technology better.### Bring role models into schools Get professionals (especially women) working in IT into classrooms, show the kids what they do on a day to day basis. Organize regular workshops (also with the help of outside organizations) where kids (and teachers) get to work on real challenges with the help of professionals or where professionals help kids build the kids' ideas. ### Get schools involved in educating (grand)parentsOffering internet safety course at the school their kids are attending; not necessary delivered by teachers themselves (can be external experts), but parents definitely need more guidance too. We need to show them technology isn't pure evil and how they can use it to promote curiosity and learning. Teachers can't be the only ones responsible for kids' behavior online.
## Focusing on free, open and accessible content### Schools funded by taxpayers should make their lesson plans and learning materials openly and freely available to everyone, indexable in non-propriety formats under a Creative Common license 
A radical idea, but it would encourage sharing and collaboration among teachers. What goes on in the classroom in still in the domain of the teachers, but it's ridiculous that teachers are reinventing the wheel all over again when we have the tools to make the process collaborative. Learning content should be publicly available and easy to remix (including the ability to translate content in all European languages) and reuse (with the right attribution, of course). Students and experts should also have the ability to build upon the material and advise teachers with their own suggestions. Let teachers spend more time developing creative teaching methods, not content. ### Focusing on free and/or open software could help school cut costs and encourage student creativity Not being tied into a proprietary system can cut down costs and encourage everyone to explore different technologies, not just learn the specifics of certain software. Promote open source, collaborative initiatives, hackable computers, so that teachers and students don't accept just what's on the market but learn that making things yourself is also an option. The logic behind computer and programs should be taught at all levels, students encouraged to adopt a "hacker" culture of breaking things apart and rebuilding a better version (coding as a tool).
### Curate a list of great resources which schools can use to teach code and various hacking projects
There's lots of people right now building organizations, apps and other resources which help people to learn to program. We should create a list of these, along with some guidance (available in local languages), to make it easier for schools to make effective use of some of these in their ICT curriculum.### Make it mandatory for all required school books to also be available in e-format at reasonable prices
Not just for convenience's sake and environmental concerns, but also to improve accessibility of books for groups with special needs. Having access to ebooks also takes away the expense for schools and saves storage space or carrying heavy books around all day. If they could be saved on memory sticks they would still work for children who don't have access to the internet at home.
## Basic infrastructure
### Allow personal computing devices in schools 
Mobile phones are powerful computers that can be an excellent learning tool. Saying no to these devices is almost like saying to bringing an Atlas to school. Of course, teachers should understand how devices work and encourage students to use them in meaningful ways. ### Establish programs that help children from families with lower income gain access to technology
Mobile devices and laptops should be welcome at schools, but we should also have programs in place to help families who cannot afford to buy technology for their kids. One option is to have community organized donation, another is to promote exchange or discount buying of hardware from companies that need to get rid of old tech. All kids in school should have easy access to broadband and a personal computing device.
### Have free, fast and reliable and safe internet access in all public schools Broadband should be a given in schools. Connecting should be easy and effortless for teachers, students and even parents. Firewalls shouldn't restrict the usage of useful web tools (Dropbox, P2P protocol, Google services, social media sites are the usual suspects here). Instead, they should only block access to the dark side of the internet, mainly inappropriate websites. Perhaps establish a common black list of "bad" websites for all schools that all schools can contribute to on the fly? Arm teachers with the appropriate knowledge about how to react when "bad" content is discovered, teach parents how to enable safe browsing and parental control tools on the kids' devices.## Higher education and lifelong learning
### Higher education curricula needs to be in touch with the local tech ecosystem and prepare students for a fast changing worldFoster collaboration between universities and industry; capitalize on local/regional industries or innovation ecosystems in the area. Include specialized degree directions (e.g. during last year) with subjects mutually "designed" by academia and industry. Large companies have jobs that cannot be filled by university graduates. Local industrial clusters are composed by a large number of small but highly specialized start-ups. You need to have either one subject on entrepreneurship or at least invite entrepreneurs and mentors to universities and talk to students - share their experiences and passions. 

Universities need to be in close contact with them and "tailor" their curricula to ensure they are training students that will have a job after they graduate.  This is not about companies such as Microsoft promoting their own tools, but rather companies advising universities on what skills are needed in the modern marketplace and help the academia come up with projects and activities that prepare students to enter the fast changing technology workplace.
### Towards a recognition of non-formal learning: advocating changing paradigms for education and science in digital societies
The EC should promote the recognition of non-formal education through online media as well as peer-learning environments such as co-working spaces et al (not with expensive certificates though). It is key to make interdisciplinary collaboration a paradigm for the European economy - only this way we can successfully undergo the post-industrialization and change towards a knowledge-based economies. This new understanding of peer- and ecosystem-learning has already been demonstrated in many fields such as applied sciences, startups science and open source projects as well in many NGOs, NPOs, the arts and alike - it is important to underline and strengthen the notion of  this kind of learning environments as laboratories for socio-economic discourse and technological innovations. Entrepreneurship is the new active citizenship.